Hash an introduction to concurrency.
Concurrency is an interesting word because it means
different things to different people in our field.
In addition to concurrency,
you may have heard the words asynchronous,
parallel,
or threaded,
bandied about.
Some people take these words to mean the same thing,
and other people very specifically delineate between each of those words.
If we're to spend an entire book's worth of time discussing concurrency,
it would be beneficial to first spend some time
discussing what we mean when we say concurrency.
We'll spend some time on the philosophy of concurrency in chapter 2,
but for now,
let's adopt a practical definition that will
serve as the foundation of our understanding.
When most people use the word concurrent,
they're usually referring to a process that
occurs simultaneously with one or more processes.
It is also usually implied that all of these
processes are making progress at about the same time.
Under this definition,
an easy way to think about this are people.
You are currently reading this sentence while others
in the world are simultaneously living their lives.
They are existing concurrently to you.
Concurrency is a broad topic in computer science,
and from this definition spring all kinds of topics
theory,
approaches to modeling concurrency,
correctness of logic,
practical issues,
even theoretical physics.
We'll touch on some of the ancillary topics throughout the book,
but we'll mostly stick to the practical issues that
involve understanding concurrency within the context of Go,
specifically
how Go chooses to model concurrency,
what issues arise from this model,
and how we can compose primitives within this model to solve problems.
In this chapter,
we'll take a broad look at some of the reasons
concurrency became such an important topic in computer science,
why concurrency is difficult and warrants careful study,
and most importantly,
the idea that despite these challenges,
Go can make programs clearer and faster by using its concurrency primitives.
As with most paths toward understanding,
we'll begin with a bit of history.
Let's first take a look at how concurrency became such an important topic.
Moore's Law,
web scale,
and the mess we're in.
In 1965,
Gordon Moore wrote a three-page paper that described both
the consolidation of the electronics market toward integrated circuits and
the doubling of the number of components in an
integrated circuit every year for at least a decade.
In 1975,
he revised this prediction to state that the number of
components on an integrated circuit would double every two years.
This prediction more or less held true until just recently,
around 2012.
Several companies foresaw this slowdown in the rate Moore's law predicted
and began to investigate alternative ways to increase computing power.
As the saying goes,
necessity is the mother of innovation,
and so it was in this way that multi-core processors were born.
This looked like a clever way to solve the bounding problems of Moore's Law,
but computer scientists soon found themselves facing
down the limits of another law,
Amdahl's Law,
named after computer architect Jean Amdahl.
Amdahl's law describes a way in which to model the potential performance
gains from implementing the solution to a problem in a parallel manner.
Simply put,
it states that the gains are bounded by how much
of the program must be written in a sequential manner.
For example,
imagine you were writing a program that was largely GUI based.
A user is presented with an interface,
clicks on some buttons,
and stuff happens.
This type of program is bounded by one
very large sequential portion of the pipeline,
human interaction.
No matter how many cores you make available to this program,
it will always be bounded by how quickly the user can interact with the interface.
Now consider a different example,
calculating digits of pi.
Thanks to a class of algorithms called spigot algorithms,
this problem is called embarrassingly parallel,
which,
despite sounding made up,
is a technical term which means that it can easily be divided into parallel tasks.
In this case,
significant gains can be made by making more cores available to your program,
and your new problem becomes how to combine and store the results.
Amdahl's law helps us understand the difference between these two problems
and can help us decide whether parallelization is the
right way to address performance concerns in our system.